EasySockets v1.16 (15 Nov 2002)
=========== © Justin Fletcher

Introduction
------------
This module is a simple interface to the Socket handling SWIs. A single module
is supplied, the ESockets module, along with EClient, a simple basic program
that you should run in a taskwindow and provides a 'raw' connection to a
server.

Note: SWI chunk is now registered as &51C00.


Connecting to hosts
-------------------
SYS "ESocket_ConnectToHost",host$,port TO handle
  attempts to connect to a host

SYS "ESocket_CheckState",handle TO state
  returns the state of the connection :
    1 we're looking things up
    2 we've looked it up and are trying to connect
    4 we've connected and are ready to go !
   -1 Host lookup failed (no such host)
   -2 Resolver failure (no response, etc)
   -3 Resolver error (it might not be running !)
   -4 No sockets left to create connection
   -5 Host is unreachable
   -6 Connection refused (not listening on that port)

SYS "ESocket_Forget",handle
  will forget about a handle

SYS "ESocket_DecodeState",state TO name$
  will convert the state number into a textual error string that should
  make more sense.

You should use something like the following to connect :

SYS "ESocket_ConnectToHost",host$,port TO handle
REPEAT
 SYS "ESocket_CheckState",handle TO state
UNTIL state=4 OR state<0
IF state<0 THEN
 SYS "ESocket_DecodeState",state TO error$
 [give an error]
 SYS "ESocket_Forget",handle
ELSE
 [do things with socket]
 SYS "ESocket_Forget",handle
ENDIF


Using the sockets
-----------------
SYS "ESocket_SendLine",handle,string$,flags
  sends a line to the other end; flags are :
   bit 0 set if you DON'T want a CR sending
   bit 1 set if you DON'T want a LF sending
   bit 2 set if the string is terminated by a 13 (otherwise 0)
  this means you'd do something like :
   SYS "ESocket_SendLine",handle,"Hello",%000
  most of the time, or :
   SYS "ESocket_SendLine",handle,line,%100
  if you've previously done $line="Hello"

SYS "ESocket_ReadLine",handle,buffer,len,flags TO ,buf,len
  which will read a whole line into a buffer, if the buffer
  is not big enough buf is returned as 0 and len as the length
  required, otherwise it's the length of the string.
  return values are therefore :
   buf  len
    0    0   no complete line received yet
    0   any  a line is available of length len (not fitting
             into your buffer)
   any  any  line of length len was read into your buffer
   any   0   zero length line was read into your buffer
  flags is a similar bit map to SendLine :
   bit 0 & 1 can be :
      %00 to use CR LF as a terminator
      %01 to use LF as a terminator
      %10 to use CR as a terminator
      %11 to use either CR or LF as a terminator
   bit 2 should be set to return the data terminated with 13
   rather than 0.
   bit 3 should be set to remove characters deleted with codes
   8 or 127. In this case the returned len is only valid when
   the buffer is. If the buffer is 0, the length is guarenteed
   to be greater than or equal to the true line length.

SYS "ESocket_SendData",handle,buffer,len TO sent
  will send a block of data. The amount of data sent is returned.

SYS "ESocket_ReadData",handle,buffer,len TO ,,len
  will read a block of data. If buffer = 0 then the length of
  data currently available will be returned in len. If not
  enough data is available then the length of that read is
  returned.

SYS "ESocket_Closed",handle,flags TO closed
  returns 1 if the socket has been closed, 0 if not
  flags can be set :
   bit 0 will ignore data in the buffer (useful for ReadLine connections)


Listening for connections
-------------------------
SYS "ESocket_Listen",port TO handle
  will attempt to listen on a port. However, if an error occurs handle
  will be :
    -4  No sockets left to create connection
    -7  Couldn't listen on that port, something else is
  
  If the port is 0, a new port will be allocated for you.

SYS "ESocket_Accept",handle,flags TO newhandle
  will accept a connection on a listening port.
  flags can be :
   bit 0 set to close the listening port after accepting
  newhandle might be returned as :
    -8  Nobody has connected to the port yet

You might do something like :

SYS "ESocket_Listen",port TO listen
IF listen>0 THEN
 REPEAT
  SYS "ESocket_Accept",listen,%1 TO handle
 UNTIL handle<>-8
 [do stuff with the socket - note that listener has gone]
 SYS "ESocket_Forget",handle
ELSE
 [report listen errors]
ENDIF

SYS "ESocket_ConnectionName",handle TO name
  will return 0 if no name is known for that connection, or
  the pointer to a zero terminated name otherwise. Connection
  names are resolved multitaskingly.

SYS "ESocket_OurAddress",handle TO ip,port
  will return the address and port number allocated to a socket. Note
  that if you are listening the ip is not likely to be 'correct'.

SYS "ESocket_TheirAddress",handle TO ip,port
  will return the address and port number which has been connected to.


Monitors
--------
SYS "ESocket_Monitor",type,... TO monitor
  Monitors are a means by which sockets can be watched for changes without
  having to continually poll them. There can be maybe 'types' of monitors,
  but at present only one is defined :
    type   meaning
     0     checks for input or closure of a socket, and also marks keyboard
           input. Format :
           SYS "ESocket_Monitor",0,handle TO monitor

SYS "ESocket_ResetMonitor",monitor,newaddress TO pollword
  is used to reset a monitor back to zero once an active event has been
  identified. If newaddress is 0 then the current address is used.

SYS "Esocket_Forget",monitor
  will forget about a monitor.

Usually TaskWindow programs will have something like :

SYS "ESocket_Monitor",0,handle TO monitor
SYS "ESocket_ResetMonitor",monitor,0 TO polladdr
REPEAT
 SYS "OS_UpCall",6,polladdr
 IF !polladdr THEN
  SYS "ESocket_ResetMonitor",monitor,0
  [process input]
 ENDIF
UNTIL <exit condition>
SYS "ESocket_Forget",monitor


Additional
----------
In the interests of ease and stopping people being foolish, EasySocket
will automatically close all sockets and monitors associated with a
particular task on it's exit. This means that you cannot pass socket handles
from one task to another safely, but does mean that in 99.9% of situations
things which have broken can safely exit knowing that they will be tidied up
after.

Do not rely on this, it's for your protection, not for your use.


*Commands
---------
EasySockets provides two *Commands, *ESockets and *EMonitors.

*ESockets
  lists the connections currently made. Information displayed may seem
  technical and probably is.

*EMonitors
  lists the monitors currently running. These will reference the handles
  from *ESockets so you'll probably have to use both to understand.


Resolvers
---------
ESockets /only/ uses the registered multi-tasking lookup interface to the
resolvers. Because of this it will only work with the Acorn or ANT resolvers.
I will support no other resolvers in this module.


Example code
------------
The example code included is very simple. Some is documented so it should be
possible to find out what you need to know. If you are having problems I
suggest you contact me to ask what's going on.


Comments
--------
I can't actually see that you'd need much more than this in the majority
of internet programs. In fact, if you do need more than this then you
know what you are doing and shouldn't be using it anyhow. However, it's
entirely possible that I've missed something blatantly obvious. If that's
so then could you please contact me and I can beat my head against a
wall :-)


Bugs
----
If you RMKill it it'll just leave all it's memory allocated and sockets open.
There's a good reason for this. It's to disuade you from doing it. Ok ?


Buffering concerns
------------------
Because of the way in which things are buffered, if you receive a line
containing over 4096 characters without a terminator (one you've asked for)
then the connection will effectively die unless you do a ReadData. The limit
itself is to prevent massive RMA fragmentation and such like. Removing the
limit would allow people almost direct access to your RMA which they could
quite easily fill by just sending lots of junk non-terminated lines.

If anyone can suggest a way of coping with this situation I'd like to hear.
My personal favourite I've got is to set a bit in the flags that says 'if
we've reached the maximum size for the buffer and there isn't a terminator in
there then (grin) destroy the lot'. Or possibly '<as above, but don't destroy
it; instead> return it to me as if it was a line'.


Use of this module
------------------
Permission for any freeware, shareware or public domain use of EasySockets is
explicitly give. Permission for inclusion in an commercial package or
publication is not given. Contact me for details.


Contact
-------
Any comments, queries, donations or bug reports can be sent to Justin
Fletcher at :

E-Mail : networking@thevillage.ndirect.co.uk
URL    : http://www.thevillage.ndirect.co.uk/gerph/
IRC    : On #Acorn as Gerph
Tel    : (01842) 812276

Snail Mail :
    Justin Fletcher
    ”Galadriel•
    17b Cromwell Road,
    Weeting,
    Brandon,
    Suffolk.
    IP27 0QT


History
-------
Version 1.00 : 04 Jan 1998
               Began writing module after will-l et al presented an incredibly
               good case for it's existance.
Version 1.01 : 05 Jan 1998
               Finished off most of the outstanding bits (like the code) and
               wrote this documentation.
               Now the only question is 'Do I mail this now, or go to bed ?'
Version 1.02 : 06 Jan 1998 (Release 1, to will-l and with !TalkerD)
               Numerous bug fixed to Listen and Accept.
               Added flags to ESocket_Closed so that we don't lock on
               ReadLines where they send a little data then disconnected.
Version 1.03 : 27 Jan 1998 (Release 2, to will-l and Richard Murray, probably
               on Freenet too)
               Added monitors so that (hopefully) smIRC can be re-compiled
               using ESockets instead of using his sockext library. Maybe then
               it won't suck 99% of the life out of his machine!
Version 1.04 : 29 Jan 1998 (Release 3, as above)
               Fixed CheckState and Closed so that they work with clients that
               don't send any initial message. Set keypressed event on
               TaskWindow_Input so that serial/socket input to a taskwindow
               triggers the pollword.
Version 1.05 : 02 May 1998 (Release 4)
               Fixed bug with Listen, added delete processing to ReadLine.
Version 1.06 : 04 May 1998 (Release 5)
               SWI Base allocated.
Version 1.07 : 23 Jul 1998 (Release 6)
               Non-blocking connections which are 'slow' now work correctly.
               Hopefully this will let IckleRC and MyRC work correctly.
               DecodeState call added for ease.
               OurAddress added for FTP client.
               SendData modified to now return the amount of data sent.
               SendData now returns the amount of data is managed to send.
               *ESockets now gives the textual description of the errors.
Version 1.08 : 07 Nov 1998 (Release 7)
               Problems with connections now fixed.
               Many more examples included.
Version 1.16 : 15 Nov 2002
               Added ESocket_TheirAddress